Tonal music comprises almost all music ever composed, performed, or produced. All this music relies on systems and hierarchies that form the basis of the music theory that has driven composition for millennia. Notes form scales, from which we derive keys, from which we derive chords. Systems govern all music, even if the performer isn’t conscious of them. Tuning systems define the pitches that can be used in music. The exact pitches or relationships between pitches can vary wildly between tuning systems, so what is considered ‘in tune’ in one system may be ‘out of tune’ in another. The system that has been almost exclusively used since the 18th century contains 12 notes to the octave, however this number is not set in stone. Microtonal tuning systems have more than 12 notes, so have a base interval smaller than the semitones 100 cents. Tuning systems traditionally used in non-western music can have from as little as 7 notes per octave, to as many as 53. However, the decisions around where these pitches go are not at all arbitrary. When two notes are played at once, humans have an intuitive sense of what sounds consonant and dissonant. Whilst tuning systems with more notes may have dissonant intervals that allow for interesting complex harmony, they need consonant intervals to maintain a tonal sound. The consonance of intervals is driven by the mathematical principles of sound, which form a basis for theoretically perfectly consonant intervals. It is mathematically impossible to have every interval be perfectly in tune with each other at once however, so forming tuning systems becomes about compromise. The consonance of some intervals comes at the cost of others, which creates a balancing act that has resulted in many different tuning systems being in contention for ‘the best’. This is the topic I will attempt to tackle in this report: What is the most effective tuning system?

What our ears perceive as sound is physically the vibration of air particles, which create oscillating waves of pressure that move towards the ear. The simplest wave is the sine wave, with the pressure of the sound varying over time in a smooth pattern that takes the shape of a sine curve, when graphed as a function of pressure over time. The amplitude of the curve represents the loudness of the sound, while the frequency of these peaks represents the perceived pitch of the sound. All other sounds are made up from complex waves, which have a graph with a different shape. Mathematician Joseph Fourier showed that any function can be represented as the sums of simpler trigonometric functions, sine and cosine. Since sound can be represented as a function of pressure over time, the waveforms of these complex tones can be shown through Fourier analysis to be made up from a number of constituent sine waves. For this reason, sine waves are known as ‘pure tones’ as they only have one frequency whereas complex waves have many. These other waves, known as harmonics, occur with frequencies at integer multiples of the fundamental - collectively known as the harmonic series. 

The harmonic series is the basis of all the intervals used in music. The octave is equivalent to the frequency ratio between the fundamental and the second harmonic (2:1), the perfect fifth is derived from the ratio between the second and third harmonic (3:2), the major third is derived from the ratio between the fourth and fifth harmonic (5:4) and so on. Generally, the simpler the frequency ratio, the more consonant the interval is to the listener. When intervals are tuned to these pure frequency ratios this is known as “just intonation”. JI is a system in which all the intervals can be represented by whole number ratios, like the 3:2 ratio of a perfect fifth. This way all intervals are completely pure. However, technically any interval in any tuning system can be represented as whole number ratios. For example, the 12TET major third has a whole number ratio - of 15749:12500. Viewing JI like this results in an unusable system for tuning as it would have an infinite number of intervals making it useless for the very purpose of tuning systems: defining intervals to form the basis of a system of harmony. For this reason, JI does not refer to any singular tuning system itself, but rather a number of systems that have had ‘limits’ to the complexity of the frequency ratios by theorists. The most common limiting system is the p-limit, in which ratios can only consist of integers with prime factors no larger than p. This results in a finite number of intervals that can be used, allowing it to act as a template for music composition. This allows JI systems to work as a functional tuning system. Using these just intervals results in a pure sound free from the beating present in impure intervals. Beating is a psychoacoustic phenomenon in which the amplitude of the resultant sound modulates when two tones are played simultaneously, with one of them being slightly out of tune from the just interval of another. Intuitively and mathematically, this makes sense, as the resulting waveform when playing two tones simultaneously is calculated simply by adding the amplitude of their waveforms together. Considering two sine waves, very nearly at unison - if one wave has a slightly different frequency than the other then due to the periodic nature of the sine function, then the difference between the two waves will increase as you go further across the $x$ axis. This leads them to go in and out of phase with each other. When they are completely out of phase, the peak of one wave aligns with the trough of the other so assuming the same amplitude there will be a total amplitude of zero at that point - no sound. Fluctuations in the amplitude of the resultant sound create an unwanted tremolo effect that at higher rates causes a rough fluttering sound. The absence of these beats in JI intervals leads to them sounding purer and more consonant, making these intervals very desirable. However, JI systems lack any real practicality for tuning as intervals are only perfectly in tune in one key. 

|Frequency|Frequency Ratio|Note Name|
|---|---|---|
|440|1:1|A|
|495|9:8|B|
|550|5:4|C#|
|586.66|4:3|D|
|660|3:2|E|
|733.33|5:3|F#|
|825|15:8|G#|

Figure 1

Using the scale provided in figure 1 we can demonstrate the mathematical inconsistencies in JI. In the key of A major, a major second above the would be a B, and a major sixth above would be F#. If modulate to the key of B, then a just fifth above the root is another F# but calculating its frequency results in a discrepancy (495*(3/2) = 742.5Hz). F# cannot have the frequency of both 733.3Hz and 742.5Hz without retuning the instrument in the middle of a performance, which is impossible on a piano. For this reason, modulating between keys always results in intervals sounding out of tune in just intonation as it can't be perfectly in tune in every key at once. Key modulation is an incredibly common compositional technique across a multitude of genres, including classical, jazz, and even popular music. In fact, from the 1960s to the 1990s, one in four number 1 hits featured a key modulation. To have such a common compositional technique be impossible in JI without the intervals in one key sounding out of tune and thus dissonant, makes it a hugely limited tuning system despite its mathematically perfect intervals. Additionally, even if keys are not modulated, it is impossible to play in a different key whilst intervals remaining in tune without retuning the instrument. For piano, all 230 strings would have to be retuned which takes over 2 hours. Since this process is so time-consuming, if Just Intonation were to be adopted as a main tuning system, pieces would likely be written and played all in the same key, which leads to monotonous music and a lack of tonal colour. Whilst not being able to modulate between keys is often cited as the biggest disadvantage of Just Intonation, the arguably bigger problem is that it is impossible for all the chords to be in tune even in a single key. There are seven diatonic chords in a given key, and for some of them, the maths doesn't add up. The I, IV, V chords are just, as are iii and vi. But ii triad is out of tune: The ratio between B and D using scale in Figure 1 (586.6/495) is not equal to the just interval for a minor third (6:5). 

These mathematical discrepancies result in a tuning system that consists of both perfectly pure intervals, and jarringly harsh intervals. Despite its flaws that make it impractical as a tuning system, JI remains one of the most important concepts in the world of tuning systems, as it presents theorists with a benchmark to aim towards with the purity of intervals. In other tuning systems, an interval being closer to its JI counterpart results in it sounding more 'in tune'. The small frequency differences that occur in the discussed mathematical inconsistencies between the pure interval and interval that occurs in that key are known as commas. Other tuning systems aim to temper out these commas, to form a tuning system as close to Just Intonation whilst all intervals always remain in tune with each other no matter the key.