
When you learn an instrument, one of the first things you’ll hear is that there are twelve notes, after which the notes start repeating. The distance between a note and its higher repetition is called an octave - and it is with these 12 notes that all music is created. Millions and millions of people have heard this before. And yet very few have actually decided to question why. And if they do they’ll find out… It’s all a lie.

More accurately, it's a gross oversimplification - it’s actually a good thing that the music education system doesn’t tell new students about microtonality and the history of tuning theory. It'd scare them right off. But since we aren’t in a music classroom right now - and it is insanely interesting - I'll feel free to dive right in.

This might be a little technical at the start, and have woooo scary numbers but I promise it won’t be too mathy and it won’t last too long. And hey if you are interested in math, maybe you’d find it interesting that Pythagoras, Newton, and Kepler (supposedly) made some big contributions to tuning theory. (as well as Ptolemy, Eratosthenes, Mercator)

Any note played on an instrument has a fundamental pitch that we can write as a frequency - that is, the frequency of the sound wave, as a function of air pressure over time. (For demonstration purposes the pitch of this oscillator will be 440Hz, or concert pitch)

If we take another pitch and play it alongside, you’ll notice some frequencies seem more at rest than others. This is an easy way to think about consonance - a more rigorous way is to look at the period of the resulting wave (lower is more consonant). If we look at the most consonant frequencies, we’ll notice a pattern. The most consonant pitch is at 880… and then at integer multiples of our base frequency. These pitches are so consonant that in music, they are considered the same note - octaves apart. Yes, the octave is just a 2/1 frequency ratio. The next most consonant pitch is 660Hz, a 3/2 ratio which in music is called a perfect fifth. A perfect fourth 4/3, major third 5/4, minor third 9/8 and so on. The most pleasing intervals to our ears are actually simple whole number frequency ratios. Simple right? Well no,, we don’t actually use these whole number ratios to tune our instruments. Instead of the major third above being 550Hz, in our system, it’s actually….. 554.37! Yikes!!! 

The volume fluctuations that you may be able to hear in the 12-TET interval is something called beating, and is all to do with the phase of the two waveforms. If you have two waves that have very slightly different frequencies, they will start out aligned, but slowly go out of sync (out of phase) until they look like reflections of each other - before slowly going back into sync. Since the waveform of the two sound waves played simultaneously is literally just the sum of each wave at each point - when they are in phase the volume will be loud as they work with each other, and quiet when they are out of phase as they oppose each other. This is a big part of our perception of purity of intervals. 

The approach of using these integer ratios is called just intonation, and though it leads to perfectly pure intervals - in practice, issues arise. To establish a JI tuning system, just using all integer frequency ratios isn’t very useful - as literally everything has one if the numbers are large enough. For example, the 12-TET major third has a whole number ratio - of 15749:12500. This results in an unusable system for tuning with an infinite number of intervals making it useless for the very purpose of tuning systems: defining the intervals to form the basis of a system of harmony. So we must impose limits on which intervals we actually use. The most common limiting system is the p-limit, in which ratios can only consist of integers with prime factors no larger than p. This gives us a finite number of intervals, allowing it to act as a template for music composition. Just…. Not a very good one. 3-limit is the only time to my knowledge where JI became mainstream, as pythagorean tuning - but since this only allows for a 'perfect' perfect fifth - all the other intervals are derived from that and are therefore a little bit bad so. Sorry pythagoras. 5-limit is the actual best example because it actually does have pure intervals for all the main intervals we use today. So why don't we use it?

 The main drawback is that JI can only really be "perfectly in tune" in one key at a time. If you tune your piano to be perfectly in tune in the key of C, and you try to play it in the key of D - it won't be perfectly in tune. I'll flash an example up on the screen showing the mathematical discrepancies of the frequencies and shit but you can just take my word for it.
 
 So without retuning all 200-odd strings of your piano, you better get used to playing all your songs in C major. To be honest that wouldn't make much of a difference to me I'm not a piano player that's like kinda my default when i touch one. But like god that would actually lead to such monotonous music if everything was in the same key Oh and key changes in the middle of songs? just forget about it.

[In the key of A major, a major second above would be a B, and a major sixth above would be F#. If modulate to the key of B, then a just fifth above the root is another F# but calculating its frequency results in a discrepancy (495*(3/2) = 742.5Hz). F# cannot have the frequency of both 733.3Hz and 742.5Hz without retuning the instrument in the middle of a performance, which is impossible on a piano. For this reason, modulating between keys always results in intervals sounding out of tune in just intonation as it can't be perfectly in tune in every key at once.]

And if you didn't think that was enough? It's also not fully in tune with itself, just in one key. Imagine your playing your song and it's like - wow nice perfect I chord, nice perfect IV chord, nice perfect V chord but... oh my ii chord is out of tune. Bummer. 

So where do we go from here. We want a tuning system that is as close as possible to this just intonation - whilst being able to be transposed any which way we please. Over the many hundreds of years many systems have been suggested and even widely used. Quarter-comma meantone was a staple back in the 17th century - whilst not alone. So-called Well temperaments (like the Bach preludes) were used alongside in this still flourishing musical landscape - some with funny names, like the banger Werkmeister III. I know it's probably like the guys name but still... werkmeister III I wish we sticked with that. What's interesting to me about these systems that were used before we settled on the now standard 12-TET, is that unlike the equal temperaments that we'll get to - different keys in these systems really were different. They tempered out the big inconsistencies in Just Intonation to get systems with little inconsistencies here and there - but different amounts of inconsistencies in different places - which meant that different keys had different intervals relative to the root note. Which is where the idea that different keys have different characters and emotions associated with them. These days all keys are just literally the same just transposed up or down a certain amount, but these actually had tuning differences that made each key sound unique. 

This is likely the idea behind Bach's Well Tempered Clavier - it features a piece in every key which when played through a Well Temperament system of the time, would show off the different characteristics of each key. What specific tuning system he was using is lost to time so we can't with any definity play it how Bach intended. I do think theres no way given the concept of having a piece in each key that it was intended for an equal temperament, despite that being the prevailing opinion in the 20th century. This is really just an aside but the tuning debacle behind the collection is so funny like music doctors interpreting these doodles on the title page as tuning instructions to decode the true tuning like what... i mean i guess its possible but be for real its probably just cute ormanentation - but actually reading the works about it they assume it as absolute fact with no source or anything. others going so far as to try to 'decode' bach's signet ring as if that held the answer to the tuning like what Bach is not some fucking tuning super spy why would he be keeping any of this a coded secret its so funny. Anyway...

And then, somewhere along the line, someone had the bright idea to just split the octave up into equal parts. Honestly don't really know why this wasn't the leading idea to begin with given it seems a lot less complicated than what "they" were doing. Actually it turns out they came up with this ages ago and thought this system just kinda... sounded a bit bad - which is funny given how agreeable it is to our modern ears. but yeah turns out the 12 tone scale that we've already been using for centuries just works really well if you split the octave equally. 

And why 12 notes to begin with? Well if we kinda start with the 7 note major scale,,  which lets be honest is the basis of everything - and then try making new major scales coming off of those notes, until you've got a bunch of accidentals, and then you just chuck out the enharmonic stuff the same note and just kinda ignore any potential discrepancies then bam you quite neatly get 12 notes without even touching equal temperament. 

And there we have it. 12 tone equal temperament, 12TET, or as its more commonly referred to these days - 12edo (equal divisions of the octave). The domineering tuning system that is likely the only one you've ever heard. The centuries long default. So surely there's nothing more to talk about right? It's a tuning system that approximates Just Intonation with pretty great accuracy, whilst being small - making it perfect for performers and composers alike - which sounds just as great no matter what key you're playing with. And it is. There's a reason why it has been the western default for centuries now. 

But. But what if we had more scales. More intervals. More chords. More colours. What if we went... smaller?

12TET is not the only equal temperament that approximates JI intervals accurately. And it doesn't even approximate them all. Whilst 12TET has arguably the most important intervals, 5 limit and 7 limit JI have a lot of intervals that 12TET just doesn't even attempt to approximate. 19 notes per octave. 22 notes per octave. 31 notes per octave. 53 notes per octave. There's a whole world of tunings that can play the music we know and love - but also play more. This is the true world of microtonality.

Take 31TET, one of the most used microtonal systems - and for good reason. This system shines with its thirds - it has a major third more accurate than 12TET, and a pretty accurate minor third too. But that's not all. Because it has more notes, theres a note in between the minor and major thirds: the neutral third. this allows us to construct neutral triads, chords with tonalities you just haven't heard before. It sounds strange in isolation, but even so i kinda like it. A lot of these new tones are an acquired taste but once you get used to them existing its kinda wow. And similarly, and I think these are the stars of the show - the supermajor and subminor thirds. These really do sound to me like an exaggerated version of major and minor and have such a cool sound. 

Our whole lives we've been conditioned to find the intervals produced by our 12 notes to be pleasing, 