
What our ears perceive as sound is physically the vibration of air particles, which create oscillating waves of pressure that move towards the ear. The most simple wave is the sine wave, which is referred to as a “pure tone” as it only contains one frequency. In a sine wave, the pressure of the sound varies over time in a smooth pattern that takes the shape of a sine curve. The amplitude of the curve represents the loudness of the sound, while the frequency of these peaks represents the perceived pitch of the sound. Frequency is measured in hertz (Hz), where 1Hz is one cycle of the wave per second. All other sounds are made up from complex waves, which have a graph with a different shape. Mathematician Joseph Fourier showed that any function can be represented as the sums of simpler trigonometric functions, namely the sine function. Since sound can be represented as a function of amplitude over time, the waveforms of these complex tones can be shown through [[Fourier Analysis]] to be made up from a number of constituent sine waves. For this reason sine waves are known as ‘pure tones’ as they only have one frequency whereas complex waves have many. These other sine waves, known as harmonics, occur at multiples of base frequency - collectively known as [[The Harmonic Series]]. For example if the sound is the note A4 being played on a piano, then when the hammer hits the string it will vibrate at 440 Hz, but also simultaneously vibrate at 880 Hz, 1320 Hz and so on. The base frequency is called the fundamental frequency and determines the pitch that is actually perceived . The amplitude of these different harmonics  is what determines the timbre of a sound. This Harmonic Series is the basis of what in music is known as [[Harmony]].