Discuss functional recovery and/or plasticity of the brain after trauma

Brain plasticity means that the brain can physically change itself in response to trauma or learning. In a traumatic event like Josie's car accident, parts of the brain may be damaged. In Josie's case her accident affected speech, meaning that her Broca and Wernicke's area were damaged, resulting in Broca's aphasia. In response to this damage the brain can undergo a process called functional recovery which is a type of brain plasticity that occurs in damaged brains where nearby undamaged parts of the brain can take over functioning from the damaged area to help the brain recover to being fully functioning. In a normally functioning brain, the neurones undergo pruning, where unused neurones go dormant and frequently used ones get stronger. During functional recovery, dormant neurones in the brain activate and become active again so they can then take over the function of the damaged area of the brain. 

An example for support for brain plasticity is a study conducted into the brains of London taxi drivers. These drivers had had to memorise a lot of routes around London, and researchers found that the part of the brain responsible for memory was bigger in taxi drivers than non-taxi drivers. This suggests that as a result of using memory more, the brain changes, and more of the brain is taken up by the part of the brain responsible for memory. This suggests that the brain is plastic, and can change its structure in response to experience.

Understanding of functional recovery and brain plasticity has resulted in practical applications, as it has allowed doctors to help treat patients with brain damage. Research has shown that younger peoples brains are better at recovering after trauma, as well as females recovering better than men. This might explain why Josie recovered well from her trauma. It has also shown that performing certain tasks as part of rehabilitation to 'exercise' that part of the brain, can result in greater restoration of functioning, meaning that doctors can treat patients more effectively.